2. Introduction

For the archivist, linked data is about universally publishing and repurposing sets of facts (assertions, metadata, statements, sentences, "triples", etc.) about your collections. As you publish these fact you will be able not only to maintain more flexible Web presences but also Web presences that are richer, more complete, and better integrated with complementary collections.


This is a travel guide — a set of itineraries for getting from here to linked data and the Semantic Web. It outlines the sorts of things you may want to know if you want to get from here to someplace else. There are many ways to get there. None of them are perfect. Each of them have their own particular strengths & weaknesses, opportunities & impediments. If you want to go on this journey at a cost of, say, $10 per day, then there are a number of options for you. If you want to spend $25 dollars per day, then a number of other options available. If you want to spend as much as $50 day, then there are quite a number of other options. This guide book will use this metaphor throughout the text so you can evaluate your options. 

------

For all intents and contexts, linked data and linked open data are synonymous, but the subtle difference does need to be  discussed. Linked open data is a qualification of linked data.  Linked open data comes with  an explicit  license agreement denoting  how the accessible data can  be “freely” used. In this case, the words “free” and “open” are analogous to free “open source software”. Just as open source software is available for use and re-use, linked open data is free for use and re-use. Attribution needs to be made. The data can be freely used. While copyrights may still be in place when it comes to linked open data, the copyrights allow for the use, re-use, and re-distribution. The intent of linked open data is to use the content in ways that it canb e used in many ways for many purposes. While the distinction between linked data and linked open data are may be large in the eyes of some people, for simplicities sake, the phrase linked data is synonymous with linked open data, even though some feel the distinction needs to be delineated to a greater degree.

------

Implementing linked data represents a different, more modern way of accomplishing some of the same goals of archival science. It is a process of making more people aware of your content. It is not the only way to make more people aware, but it represents a way that will be wide spread, thorough, and complete.

Linked Archival Metadata: A Guidebook provides archivists with an overview of the current linked data landscape, define basic concepts, identify practical strategies for adoption, and emphasize the tangible payoffs for archives implementing linked data. It focuses on clarifying why archives and archival users can benefit from linked data and will identify a graduated approach to applying linked data methods to archival description.

The Guidebook is a product of the Linked Archival Metadata planning project (LiAM), led by the Digital Collections and Archives at Tufts University and funded by the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS). LiAM’s goals include defining use cases for linked data in archives and providing a roadmap to describe options for archivists intending to share their description using linked data techniques.
