2.a Why linked data, and why now?

Linked data, or more recently referred to as “linked open data” for reasons to be explained later, is a proposed technique for generating new knowledge. It is intended to be a synergy between people and sets of agreed upon computer systems that when combined will enable both people and computers to discover and build relationships between seemingly disparate data and information to create and discover new knowledge.

In a nutshell, this is how it works. People possess data and information. They encode that data and information in any number of formats easily readable by computers. They then make the encoded data and information available on the Web. Computers are then employed to systematically harvested the encoded data. Since the data is easily readable, the computers store the data locally and look for similarly encoded things in other locally stored data sets. When similar items are identified relationships can be inferred between the items as well as the other items in the data set. To people, some of these relationships may seem obvious and “old hat”. On the other hand, since the data sets can be massive, relationships that were never observed previously may come to light, thus new knowledge is created.

Some of this knowledge may be trivial. For example, there might be a data set of places -- places from all over the world including things like geographic coordinates, histories of the places, images, etc. There might be another data set of poeple. Each person may be described using their name, their place of birth, and a short biography. These data sets may contain ten’s of thousands of items each. Using linked data it would be possible to cross reference the people with the places to discover who might have met whom when and where. Some people may have similar ideas, and those ideas may have been generated in a particular place. Linked data may help in discovering who was in the same place at the same time and the researcher may be better able to figure out how a particular idea came to fruition. 

Here’s an example hitting closer to the home of archives and archivists. Suppose most archival finding aids were written in a format easily readable by computers. Let’s call this format Encoded Archival Description. Let’s suppose these finding aids were made available on the Web. Let’s suppose one or more computers crawled these archival sites harvesting the finding aids. Once done a computer program could be used to find all the occurrences of particular name and generate a virtual finding aid that is more complete and more comprehensible than any single finding aid on that particular person. 

The amount of data and information accessible today is greater in size than it has ever been in human history. Using our traditional techniques of reading, re-reading, writing, discussing, etc. is more than possible to learn new things about the state of the world, the universe, and the human condition. By exploiting the current state of computer technology is possible to expand upon our traditional techniques and possibly accelerate the mass of knowledge. 
