3.c. Brief overview of the history of LOD-LAM (done)

The history of linked data in libraries, archives, and museums is rooted in history of the Semantic Web.

The canonical article describing the Semantic Web was written by Tim Berners-Lee, James Hendler, and Ora Lassila in 2001. [1] The article described the concept of the Semantic Web -- an environment where Internet-wide information was freely available for both people and computers to access with the ultimate purpose of bringing new knowledge to light. At that time, to implement the ideas behind the Semantic Web, many people created RDF/XML files side-by-side with their HTML and saved them on Web servers. Around this same time the idea of "Web services" and REST-ful computing were beginning to be articulated by the Internet community. Simply put, Web services and REST-ful computing are/were a way for computers to request and share information over the World Wide Web. Web services and REST-ful computing became popular because just about anybody can do it. All you usually have to do is submit a very long URL plus numerous variable/value pairs to a Web server, and the Web server returns some data. Many computer programmers and people who could write HTML quickly picked up on this idea, and it became popular. Besides, no Semantic Web "killer application" had been demonstrated to the wider Internet community, and many computer technologists thought RDF/XML was a poor way of serializing RDF. The idea of the Semantic Web faded for a few years.

In 2006 Berners-Lee more concretely described how to make the Semantic Web a reality in a text called “Linked Data -- Design Issues”. [2] It it he advocated a four-step process for making content freely available on the Web. He also advocated for simple URLs to be used to describe things. At this same time additional RDF serializations were becoming popular; RDF/XML was no longer the only way to express RDF. Also a few entrepreneurial individuals were also beginning to provide software services for creating, maintaining, and distributing RDF. These developments, plus the kinship of "all things open" (open source software, open access publishing, open data, etc.) with the fundamental goals of the Semantic Web, probably led to the current interest in linked data. Since then an increasing number of specialized communities have expressed and demonstrated interest in linked data. Linked data technologies are maturing.

[1] canonical article - http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-semantic-web/
[2] design issues - http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html

