6. On Your Way: Next Steps

6.a. Integration into daily practice

6.b. Three Cs: Cleanup, Conversion, Consistency

The article entitled Recipes for Enhancing Digital Collections with Linked Data
by Thomas Johnson and Karen Estlund (http://journal.code4lib.org/articles/9214) outlines a number of ways of cleaning up data in content management systems by way of RDF statements. 

clean up steps include:

	1.	Remove noise
	2.	Normalize presentation
	3.	Assign URIs for curation objects
	4.	Map legacy elements to Linked Data vocabularies

As stated by Hillman, the process of moving to linked data is The key to this aug- mentation process involves changing the basic metadata unit from “record” to “statement.” — http://dcpapers.dublincore.org/pubs/article/view/770/766

Problems with data, again from hillman an:

  1. missing data – metadata elements not present in supplied metadata
  2. incorrect data – metadata values not con- forming to standard element use 
  3. confusing data – multiple values crammed into a single metadata element, embedded html tags, etc. 
  4. insufficient data – e.g., no indication of controlled vocabularies used 

Safe transformations include:

  1. remove “noise” – a partial solution to the “incorrect data” problem. For example, we remove metadata with no information value, such as empty metadata elements, metadata elements with values such as “unknown” or “n/a” or consisting entirely of dashes or other punctuation.

  2. detect and identify controlled vocabular- ies in use whenever possible – a partial solution to the “insufficient data” prob- lem. For example, the DCMIType encod- ing scheme is applied to DC “Type” elements when their value is one of the allowed DCMITypes [10]. This works well for small controlled vocabularies; however, it does not scale well to large vocabularies such as LCSH.

  3. normalize metadata presentation – clean up the values: remove double XML en- codings (“&amp;lt;” becomes “&lt;”), extra whitespace (a tab followed by five spaces becomes a single space), etc.


Creating and maintaining metadata is a never-ending process. The items being described can always use elaboration. Collections may increase is size. Rights applied against content may change. Things become digitized, or digitized things are migrated from one format to another. Because of these sorts of things and many others, cleanup, conversion, and consistency are something every metadata specialist needs to keep in mind. 

Cleanup, conversion, and consistency means many things. Does all of your metadata use the same set of one or more vocabularies? Are things spelled correctly? Maybe you used abbreviations in one document but spelled things out in another? Have you migrated your JPEG images to JPEG2000 or TIFF formats? Maybe the EAD DTD has been updated, and you want (need) to migrate your finding aids from one XML format to another? Do all of your finding aids exhibit the same level of detail; are some “thinner” than others? Have you used one form of a person’s name in one document but used another form in a different document? The answers to these sorts of questions point to the need for cleanup, conversion, and consistency. 

