

Out takes

The Semantic Web is about encoding data, information, and knowledge in computer-readable fashions, making these encodings accessible on the World Wide Web, allowing computers to crawl the encodings, and finally, employing reasoning engines against them for the purpose of discovering and creating new knowledge. The following section are a primer to the principles and practices of linked data.

linked open Data

For all intents and contexts, linked data and linked open data are synonymous, but the subtle difference does need to be  discussed. Linked open data is a qualification of linked data.  Linked open data comes with  an explicit  license agreement denoting  how the accessible data can  be "freely" used. In this case, the words "free" and "open" are analogous to free "open source software". Just as open source software is available for use and re-use, linked open data is free for use and re-use. Attribution needs to be made. The data can be freely used. While copyrights may still be in place when it comes to linked open data, the copyrights allow for the use, re-use, and re-distribution. The intent of linked open data is to use the content in ways that it canb e used in many ways for many purposes. While the distinction between linked data and linked open data are may be large in the eyes of some people, for simplicities sake, the phrase linked data is synonymous with linked open data, even though some feel the distinction needs to be delineated to a greater degree.

Linked data is a standardized process for publishing and disseminating information via the Web. It represents the current "how" behind the ideas the Semantic Web.

Increasingly you will hear of of linked data being qualified as "linked open data". The "open" qualifier alludes to the important distinctions between truly free data/information and licensed data/information coming with strings attached. Truly "open" linked data comes with no financial restrictions or restrictions on use, but there may very well be attribution requirements.

