3.c. Brief overview of the history of LOD-LAM

The canonical article describing the Semantic Web was written by Tim Berners-Lee, James Hendler, and Ora Lassila in 2001. At the time many people created RDF/XML files side-by-side with their HTML files and put them both on Web servers. Around this same time the idea of "Web services" and REST-ful computing were beginning to be articulated by the Internet community. Simply put, Web services and REST-ful computing are/were a way for computers to request and share information over the World Wide Web. One reason Web services and REST-ful computing are/were popular is because just about anybody can do it. All you usually have to do is submit a very long URL plus numerous variable/value pairs to a Web server, and the Web server returns some data. Many computer programmers and people who could write HTML understood this process quickly, and it became popular. Besides, no Semantic Web "killer application" had been demonstrated to the wider Internet community. More over, many computer technologists thought RDF/XML was a poor way of serializing RDF. The idea of the Semantic Web faded for a few years.

In 2006 Berners-Lee more concretely described how to make the Semantic Web a reality in a text called “Linked Data -- Design Issues”. It it he advocated a complementary way for computers to request and share information, namely, a process called "content negotiation". In this process much simpler URLs (easily human-readable "cool URLs") were sent to a Web server as well as a request for the Web server's response to be in a specified format: HTML, PDF, etc. At this same time additional RDF serializations were becoming popular. RDF/XML was no longer the only way to express RDF. By this time a few entrepreneurial companies were beginning to provide software services for creating, maintaining, and distributing RDF. These developments, plus the kinship of all things open (open source software, open access publishing, and open data) with the fundamental goals of the Semantic Web, probably led to the current interest in linked data.

